README.md, before:

# Eye Tracking Anti-Cheat System - Mathematical Documentation

## Getting Started

### Installation

1. **Backend (Python Server)**:
   ```bash
   cd EyeTracking
   pip install -r ../requirements.txt
   ```


### Running the System

1. **Start the Python Backend Server**:
   ```bash
   cd EyeTracking
   # Launch the server
   python main.py
   ```
   The server will run on `http://localhost:5000`

    Without the control point method :
   ```
   Invoke-RestMethod -Uri "http://localhost:5000/start" -Method POST -ContentType "application/json" -Body '{"control_points_enabled": false}'
   ```
    With the control point method : 
    ```
    Invoke-RestMethod -Uri "http://localhost:5000/start" -Method POST -ContentType "application/json" -Body '{"control_points_enabled": true}'
    ```
## Overview

This document provides a comprehensive mathematical analysis of the eye tracking anti-cheat system implemented in `ca_clean.py`. The system uses objective behavioral metrics, statistical analysis, and control point validation to detect cheating attempts in real-time.

## Table of Contents

1. [Core Mathematical Concepts](#core-mathematical-concepts)
2. [Behavioral Metrics](#behavioral-metrics)
3. [Statistical Analysis](#statistical-analysis)
4. [Control Point Validation](#control-point-validation)
5. [Smoothing Algorithms](#smoothing-algorithms)
6. [Risk Assessment](#risk-assessment)
7. [Implementation Details](#implementation-details)

---

## Core Mathematical Concepts

### Coordinate System

The system operates in a 2D screen coordinate system where:
- **Origin**: Top-left corner (0, 0)
- **X-axis**: Horizontal, increasing rightward
- **Y-axis**: Vertical, increasing downward
- **Bounds**: [0, screen_width] × [0, screen_height]

Each gaze position is represented as: **P(t) = (x(t), y(t))**

### Time Series Analysis

Gaze data forms a discrete time series:
```
G = {P(t₀), P(t₁), P(t₂), ..., P(tₙ)}
```

Where each position P(tᵢ) represents the gaze coordinates at time tᵢ.

---

## Behavioral Metrics

### 1. Spatial Dispersion

**Purpose**: Measures the spread of gaze positions to detect unnatural clustering or excessive wandering.

**Mathematical Definition**:
```
σ_spatial = √[(σₓ² + σᵧ²) / 2]
```

Where:
- `σₓ = std([x₁, x₂, ..., xₙ])` - Standard deviation of X coordinates
- `σᵧ = std([y₁, y₂, ..., yₙ])` - Standard deviation of Y coordinates

**Interpretation**:
- Low values (< 50px): Excessive focus, possible bot behavior
- High values (> 500px): Erratic movement, possible distraction
- Normal range: 100-300px for typical reading/viewing tasks

### 2. Velocity Variance

**Purpose**: Analyzes the consistency of eye movement velocities to detect artificial patterns.

**Step 1 - Calculate instantaneous velocities**:
```
v(tᵢ) = √[(x(tᵢ) - x(tᵢ₋₁))² + (y(tᵢ) - y(tᵢ₋₁))²] / Δt
```

**Step 2 - Compute velocity variance**:
```
σ²_velocity = (1/n) Σ[v(tᵢ) - v̄]²
```

Where `v̄` is the mean velocity.

**Biological Context**:
- Human saccades: 30-500°/second (highly variable)
- Smooth pursuit: 1-30°/second (consistent)
- Artificial movements often show abnormally low variance

### 3. Off-Screen Percentage

**Purpose**: Quantifies how much time is spent looking away from the screen.

**Mathematical Definition**:
```
P_offscreen = (N_offscreen / N_total) × 100%
```

Where:
- `N_offscreen = |{P(tᵢ) : x(tᵢ) ∉ [0, W] ∨ y(tᵢ) ∉ [0, H]}|`
- `N_total` = Total number of gaze samples
- `W, H` = Screen width and height

**Cheating Indicators**:
- > 30%: High likelihood of looking at external resources
- > 50%: Strong indicator of cheating behavior

### 4. Fixation Clustering

**Purpose**: Analyzes the spatial distribution of fixation points using pairwise distances.

**Mathematical Definition**:
```
d̄_fixation = (2/[n(n-1)]) ΣΣ √[(xᵢ - xⱼ)² + (yᵢ - yⱼ)²]
```

Where the double sum covers all unique pairs (i,j) with i < j.

**Interpretation**:
- Low clustering (high d̄): Normal scanning behavior
- High clustering (low d̄): Possible focus on specific areas or artificial patterns

### 5. Screen Coverage

**Purpose**: Measures the area of screen actively viewed.

**Mathematical Definition**:
```
Coverage = [(max(X) - min(X)) × (max(Y) - min(Y))] / (W × H) × 100%
```

**Edge Cases**:
- Very low coverage (< 10%): Tunnel vision or bot behavior
- Very high coverage (> 90%): Possible rapid scanning or artificial movement

### 6. Gaze Entropy

**Purpose**: Measures the unpredictability of gaze patterns using information theory concepts.

**Mathematical Definition**:
```
H_gaze = σ_spatial / max(1, v̄_velocity)
```

This simplified entropy measure relates spatial randomness to movement consistency.

**Interpretation**:
- Low entropy: Predictable, possibly artificial patterns
- High entropy: Natural human variability

---

## Statistical Analysis

### Baseline Calibration

During the first 30 seconds, the system establishes individual baselines for each metric.

**For each metric M**:
```
μₘ = (1/n) Σ Mᵢ                    (Sample mean)
σₘ = √[(1/(n-1)) Σ(Mᵢ - μₘ)²]     (Sample standard deviation)
```

**Baseline Structure**:
```python
baseline_metrics[M] = {
    'mean': μₘ,
    'std': σₘ, 
    'min': min(M₁, M₂, ..., Mₙ),
    'max': max(M₁, M₂, ..., Mₙ)
}
```

### Z-Score Analysis

**Purpose**: Standardizes current behavior against individual baseline.

**Mathematical Definition**:
```
Z_M = |M_current - μₘ| / σₘ
```

**Interpretation**:
- Z < 1: Within normal range (68% confidence interval)
- 1 ≤ Z < 2: Moderate deviation (95% confidence interval)
- 2 ≤ Z < 3: Significant deviation (99.7% confidence interval)  
- Z ≥ 3: Extreme deviation (> 99.7% confidence interval)

### Risk Score Calculation

**Step 1 - Convert Z-score to risk percentage**:
```
Risk_M = min(100, (Z_M / 3) × 100) × W_M
```

Where `W_M` is the weight assigned to metric M.

**Step 2 - Aggregate total risk**:
```
Risk_total = Σ Risk_M
```

---

## Control Point Validation

### Control Point Generation

**Random Uniform Distribution**:
```
x_control ~ U(0.1W, 0.9W)
y_control ~ U(0.1H, 0.9H)
```

This ensures control points stay within the central 80% of the screen, avoiding edge effects.

### Distance Error Calculation

**Euclidean Distance**:
```
d_error = √[(x_predicted - x_control)² + (y_predicted - y_control)²]
```

### Accuracy Assessment

**Validation Criteria**:
```
Valid = {
    True,  if d_error ≤ tolerance_pixels
    False, otherwise
}
```

**Session Accuracy**:
```
Accuracy = N_valid / N_total
```

**Compromise Detection**:
```
Compromised = {
    True,  if Accuracy < 0.7 AND N_total ≥ 3
    False, otherwise
}
```

---

## Smoothing Algorithms

### Simple Moving Average

**Mathematical Definition**:
```
P̄_SMA(t) = (1/n) Σ P(t-i+1)    for i = 1 to n
```

### Exponential Smoothing

**Recursive Formula**:
```
P̄_EXP(t) = α × P(t) + (1-α) × P̄_EXP(t-1)
```

Where `α ∈ [0,1]` is the smoothing parameter.

### Hybrid Smoothing (Used in System)

**Blended Approach**:
```
P̄_final(t) = 0.7 × P̄_SMA(t) + 0.3 × P̄_EXP(t)
```

This combination provides both stability (SMA) and responsiveness (EXP).

---

## Risk Assessment

### Weighted Risk Model

**Weight Assignment**:
```python
weights = {
    'off_screen_percentage': 0.40,  # Highest priority
    'fixation_clustering': 0.20,    # Important for focus analysis
    'spatial_dispersion': 0.15,     # Movement pattern analysis  
    'velocity_variance': 0.15,      # Consistency checking
    'screen_coverage': 0.00,        # Disabled (edge case metric)
    'gaze_entropy': 0.10           # Randomness analysis
}
```

**Final Risk Calculation**:
```
Risk_final = Σ (Weight_i × Risk_i)
```

### Threat Level Classification

```
Classification = {
    "Low Risk":      Risk_final < 30%
    "Medium Risk":   30% ≤ Risk_final < 60%  
    "High Risk":     60% ≤ Risk_final < 80%
    "Critical":      Risk_final ≥ 80%
}
```

---

## Implementation Details

### Data Structures

**Position Buffer**:
```python
positions = deque(maxlen=20)  # Last 20 raw positions
smoothed_positions = deque(maxlen=15)  # Last 15 smoothed positions
```

**Control Point Structure**:
```python
@dataclass
class ControlPoint:
    timestamp: float
    expected_position: Tuple[int, int]
    predicted_position: Tuple[int, int] 
    distance_error: float
    is_valid: bool
```

### Performance Optimizations

**Circular Buffers**: Use `collections.deque` with fixed `maxlen` for O(1) append operations.

**Incremental Statistics**: Calculate running statistics without storing all historical data.

**Lazy Evaluation**: Compute expensive metrics only when sufficient data is available.

### Numerical Stability

**Division by Zero Protection**:
```python
denominator = max(baseline['std'], 1e-6)  # Prevents division by zero
z_score = abs(current_val - baseline['mean']) / denominator
```

**Boundary Clamping**:
```python
risk_score = min(100, max(0, calculated_risk))  # Clamp to [0, 100]
```

---

## Mathematical Assumptions

### 1. Gaussian Distribution
The system assumes baseline metrics follow approximately normal distributions, justifying the use of Z-scores.

### 2. Independence  
Metrics are assumed to be conditionally independent given the user's behavior state.

### 3. Stationarity
User behavior patterns are assumed to be relatively stable during the calibration period.

### 4. Linear Risk Aggregation
Individual risk scores are combined linearly, which may not capture complex interaction effects.

---

## Validation and Calibration

### Statistical Validation

**Confidence Intervals**: The system uses 99.7% confidence intervals (3σ rule) for anomaly detection.

**Sample Size**: Minimum 5 data points required for meaningful statistical analysis.

**Temporal Window**: 30-second calibration period balances accuracy and responsiveness.

### Empirical Tuning

**Threshold Selection**: Risk thresholds (30%, 60%, 80%) derived from empirical testing.

**Weight Optimization**: Metric weights optimized based on false positive/negative rates.

**Control Point Tolerance**: 100-pixel tolerance accounts for natural eye-tracking inaccuracy.

---

## Limitations and Future Improvements

### Current Limitations

1. **Linear Risk Model**: May miss complex behavioral patterns
2. **Fixed Weights**: Not adaptive to individual differences
3. **Temporal Independence**: Doesn't model temporal correlations
4. **Limited Context**: No consideration of task-specific normal behavior

### Potential Improvements

1. **Machine Learning**: Replace linear model with trained classifiers
2. **Temporal Modeling**: Add time-series analysis for sequential patterns
3. **Adaptive Thresholds**: Personalize thresholds based on user history
4. **Multi-Modal**: Integrate additional biometric signals

---

## References and Further Reading

1. Duchowski, A. T. (2017). *Eye Tracking Methodology: Theory and Practice*
2. Holmqvist, K. et al. (2011). *Eye Tracking: A Comprehensive Guide to Methods and Measures*
3. Rayner, K. (2009). "Eye movements and attention in reading, scene perception, and visual search"
4. Young, L. R. & Sheena, D. (1975). "Survey of eye movement recording methods"

---

*This document provides the mathematical foundation for understanding and extending the eye tracking anti-cheat system. For implementation details, refer to the source code in `main.py`.*

Commit message:

updated readme with code sumit

README.md, after:

# Eye Tracking Anti-Cheat System - Mathematical Documentation

## Getting Started

### Installation

1. **Backend (Python Server)**:
   ```bash
   cd EyeTracking
   pip install -r ../requirements.txt
   ```


### Running the System

1. **Start the Python Backend Server**:
   ```bash
   cd EyeTracking
   # Launch the server
   python main.py
   ```
   The server will run on `http://localhost:5000`

    Without the control point method :
   ```
   Invoke-RestMethod -Uri "http://localhost:5000/start" -Method POST -ContentType "application/json" -Body '{"control_points_enabled": false}'
   ```
    With the control point method :
    ```
    Invoke-RestMethod -Uri "http://localhost:5000/start" -Method POST -ContentType "application/json" -Body '{"control_points_enabled": true}'
    ```

### Code Submission and Evaluation

Once the server is running, you can submit your code to the `/submit_code` endpoint for evaluation. The system uses an AI model to grade your code based on correctness, style, and potential security vulnerabilities.

The web client uses that endpoint to submit code and receive evaluations.

The response will contain the AI's evaluation of your code.
## Overview

This document provides a comprehensive mathematical analysis of the eye tracking anti-cheat system implemented in `ca_clean.py`. The system uses objective behavioral metrics, statistical analysis, and control point validation to detect cheating attempts in real-time.

## Table of Contents

1. [Core Mathematical Concepts](#core-mathematical-concepts)
2. [Behavioral Metrics](#behavioral-metrics)
3. [Statistical Analysis](#statistical-analysis)
4. [Control Point Validation](#control-point-validation)
5. [Smoothing Algorithms](#smoothing-algorithms)
6. [Risk Assessment](#risk-assessment)
7. [Implementation Details](#implementation-details)

---

## Core Mathematical Concepts

### Coordinate System

The system operates in a 2D screen coordinate system where:
- **Origin**: Top-left corner (0, 0)
- **X-axis**: Horizontal, increasing rightward
- **Y-axis**: Vertical, increasing downward
- **Bounds**: [0, screen_width] × [0, screen_height]

Each gaze position is represented as: **P(t) = (x(t), y(t))**

### Time Series Analysis

Gaze data forms a discrete time series:
```
G = {P(t₀), P(t₁), P(t₂), ..., P(tₙ)}
```

Where each position P(tᵢ) represents the gaze coordinates at time tᵢ.

---

## Behavioral Metrics

### 1. Spatial Dispersion

**Purpose**: Measures the spread of gaze positions to detect unnatural clustering or excessive wandering.

**Mathematical Definition**:
```
σ_spatial = √[(σₓ² + σᵧ²) / 2]
```

Where:
- `σₓ = std([x₁, x₂, ..., xₙ])` - Standard deviation of X coordinates
- `σᵧ = std([y₁, y₂, ..., yₙ])` - Standard deviation of Y coordinates

**Interpretation**:
- Low values (< 50px): Excessive focus, possible bot behavior
- High values (> 500px): Erratic movement, possible distraction
- Normal range: 100-300px for typical reading/viewing tasks

### 2. Velocity Variance

**Purpose**: Analyzes the consistency of eye movement velocities to detect artificial patterns.

**Step 1 - Calculate instantaneous velocities**:
```
v(tᵢ) = √[(x(tᵢ) - x(tᵢ₋₁))² + (y(tᵢ) - y(tᵢ₋₁))²] / Δt
```

**Step 2 - Compute velocity variance**:
```
σ²_velocity = (1/n) Σ[v(tᵢ) - v̄]²
```

Where `v̄` is the mean velocity.

**Biological Context**:
- Human saccades: 30-500°/second (highly variable)
- Smooth pursuit: 1-30°/second (consistent)
- Artificial movements often show abnormally low variance

### 3. Off-Screen Percentage

**Purpose**: Quantifies how much time is spent looking away from the screen.

**Mathematical Definition**:
```
P_offscreen = (N_offscreen / N_total) × 100%
```

Where:
- `N_offscreen = |{P(tᵢ) : x(tᵢ) ∉ [0, W] ∨ y(tᵢ) ∉ [0, H]}|`
- `N_total` = Total number of gaze samples
- `W, H` = Screen width and height

**Cheating Indicators**:
- > 30%: High likelihood of looking at external resources
- > 50%: Strong indicator of cheating behavior

### 4. Fixation Clustering

**Purpose**: Analyzes the spatial distribution of fixation points using pairwise distances.

**Mathematical Definition**:
```
d̄_fixation = (2/[n(n-1)]) ΣΣ √[(xᵢ - xⱼ)² + (yᵢ - yⱼ)²]
```

Where the double sum covers all unique pairs (i,j) with i < j.

**Interpretation**:
- Low clustering (high d̄): Normal scanning behavior
- High clustering (low d̄): Possible focus on specific areas or artificial patterns

### 5. Screen Coverage

**Purpose**: Measures the area of screen actively viewed.

**Mathematical Definition**:
```
Coverage = [(max(X) - min(X)) × (max(Y) - min(Y))] / (W × H) × 100%
```

**Edge Cases**:
- Very low coverage (< 10%): Tunnel vision or bot behavior
- Very high coverage (> 90%): Possible rapid scanning or artificial movement

### 6. Gaze Entropy

**Purpose**: Measures the unpredictability of gaze patterns using information theory concepts.

**Mathematical Definition**:
```
H_gaze = σ_spatial / max(1, v̄_velocity)
```

This simplified entropy measure relates spatial randomness to movement consistency.

**Interpretation**:
- Low entropy: Predictable, possibly artificial patterns
- High entropy: Natural human variability

---

## Statistical Analysis

### Baseline Calibration

During the first 30 seconds, the system establishes individual baselines for each metric.

**For each metric M**:
```
μₘ = (1/n) Σ Mᵢ                    (Sample mean)
σₘ = √[(1/(n-1)) Σ(Mᵢ - μₘ)²]     (Sample standard deviation)
```

**Baseline Structure**:
```python
baseline_metrics[M] = {
    'mean': μₘ,
    'std': σₘ,
    'min': min(M₁, M₂, ..., Mₙ),
    'max': max(M₁, M₂, ..., Mₙ)
}
```

### Z-Score Analysis

**Purpose**: Standardizes current behavior against individual baseline.

**Mathematical Definition**:
```
Z_M = |M_current - μₘ| / σₘ
```

**Interpretation**:
- Z < 1: Within normal range (68% confidence interval)
- 1 ≤ Z < 2: Moderate deviation (95% confidence interval)
- 2 ≤ Z < 3: Significant deviation (99.7% confidence interval)
- Z ≥ 3: Extreme deviation (> 99.7% confidence interval)

### Risk Score Calculation

**Step 1 - Convert Z-score to risk percentage**:
```
Risk_M = min(100, (Z_M / 3) × 100) × W_M
```

Where `W_M` is the weight assigned to metric M.

**Step 2 - Aggregate total risk**:
```
Risk_total = Σ Risk_M
```

---

## Control Point Validation

### Control Point Generation

**Random Uniform Distribution**:
```
x_control ~ U(0.1W, 0.9W)
y_control ~ U(0.1H, 0.9H)
```

This ensures control points stay within the central 80% of the screen, avoiding edge effects.

### Distance Error Calculation

**Euclidean Distance**:
```
d_error = √[(x_predicted - x_control)² + (y_predicted - y_control)²]
```

### Accuracy Assessment

**Validation Criteria**:
```
Valid = {
    True,  if d_error ≤ tolerance_pixels
    False, otherwise
}
```

**Session Accuracy**:
```
Accuracy = N_valid / N_total
```

**Compromise Detection**:
```
Compromised = {
    True,  if Accuracy < 0.7 AND N_total ≥ 3
    False, otherwise
}
```

---

## Smoothing Algorithms

### Simple Moving Average

**Mathematical Definition**:
```
P̄_SMA(t) = (1/n) Σ P(t-i+1)    for i = 1 to n
```

### Exponential Smoothing

**Recursive Formula**:
```
P̄_EXP(t) = α × P(t) + (1-α) × P̄_EXP(t-1)
```

Where `α ∈ [0,1]` is the smoothing parameter.

### Hybrid Smoothing (Used in System)

**Blended Approach**:
```
P̄_final(t) = 0.7 × P̄_SMA(t) + 0.3 × P̄_EXP(t)
```

This combination provides both stability (SMA) and responsiveness (EXP).

---

## Risk Assessment

### Weighted Risk Model

**Weight Assignment**:
```python
weights = {
    'off_screen_percentage': 0.40,  # Highest priority
    'fixation_clustering': 0.20,    # Important for focus analysis
    'spatial_dispersion': 0.15,     # Movement pattern analysis
    'velocity_variance': 0.15,      # Consistency checking
    'screen_coverage': 0.00,        # Disabled (edge case metric)
    'gaze_entropy': 0.10           # Randomness analysis
}
```

**Final Risk Calculation**:
```
Risk_final = Σ (Weight_i × Risk_i)
```

### Threat Level Classification

```
Classification = {
    "Low Risk":      Risk_final < 30%
    "Medium Risk":   30% ≤ Risk_final < 60%
    "High Risk":     60% ≤ Risk_final < 80%
    "Critical":      Risk_final ≥ 80%
}
```

---

## Implementation Details

### Data Structures

**Position Buffer**:
```python
positions = deque(maxlen=20)  # Last 20 raw positions
smoothed_positions = deque(maxlen=15)  # Last 15 smoothed positions
```

**Control Point Structure**:
```python
@dataclass
class ControlPoint:
    timestamp: float
    expected_position: Tuple[int, int]
    predicted_position: Tuple[int, int]
    distance_error: float
    is_valid: bool
```

### Performance Optimizations

**Circular Buffers**: Use `collections.deque` with fixed `maxlen` for O(1) append operations.

**Incremental Statistics**: Calculate running statistics without storing all historical data.

**Lazy Evaluation**: Compute expensive metrics only when sufficient data is available.

### Numerical Stability

**Division by Zero Protection**:
```python
denominator = max(baseline['std'], 1e-6)  # Prevents division by zero
z_score = abs(current_val - baseline['mean']) / denominator
```

**Boundary Clamping**:
```python
risk_score = min(100, max(0, calculated_risk))  # Clamp to [0, 100]
```

---

## Mathematical Assumptions

### 1. Gaussian Distribution
The system assumes baseline metrics follow approximately normal distributions, justifying the use of Z-scores.

### 2. Independence
Metrics are assumed to be conditionally independent given the user's behavior state.

### 3. Stationarity
User behavior patterns are assumed to be relatively stable during the calibration period.

### 4. Linear Risk Aggregation
Individual risk scores are combined linearly, which may not capture complex interaction effects.

---

## Validation and Calibration

### Statistical Validation

**Confidence Intervals**: The system uses 99.7% confidence intervals (3σ rule) for anomaly detection.

**Sample Size**: Minimum 5 data points required for meaningful statistical analysis.

**Temporal Window**: 30-second calibration period balances accuracy and responsiveness.

### Empirical Tuning

**Threshold Selection**: Risk thresholds (30%, 60%, 80%) derived from empirical testing.

**Weight Optimization**: Metric weights optimized based on false positive/negative rates.

**Control Point Tolerance**: 100-pixel tolerance accounts for natural eye-tracking inaccuracy.

---

## Limitations and Future Improvements

### Current Limitations

1. **Linear Risk Model**: May miss complex behavioral patterns
2. **Fixed Weights**: Not adaptive to individual differences
3. **Temporal Independence**: Doesn't model temporal correlations
4. **Limited Context**: No consideration of task-specific normal behavior

### Potential Improvements

1. **Machine Learning**: Replace linear model with trained classifiers
2. **Temporal Modeling**: Add time-series analysis for sequential patterns
3. **Adaptive Thresholds**: Personalize thresholds based on user history
4. **Multi-Modal**: Integrate additional biometric signals

---

## References and Further Reading

1. Duchowski, A. T. (2017). *Eye Tracking Methodology: Theory and Practice*
2. Holmqvist, K. et al. (2011). *Eye Tracking: A Comprehensive Guide to Methods and Measures*
3. Rayner, K. (2009). "Eye movements and attention in reading, scene perception, and visual search"
4. Young, L. R. & Sheena, D. (1975). "Survey of eye movement recording methods"

---

*This document provides the mathematical foundation for understanding and extending the eye tracking anti-cheat system. For implementation details, refer to the source code in `main.py`.*
